Lionel Andrés "Leo" Messi Cuccittini (Spanish pronunciation: [ljoˈnel anˈdɾes ˈmesi]) (born 24 June 1987) is an Argentine footballer.[5] He plays for the Argentina national team as a forward. He is currently a free agent, as his contract at FC Barcelona expired. He also has Spanish citizenship, meaning he can play for Spain. Many experts and critics consider Messi as one of the greatest football players of all time. Some[who?] even say he is the greatest player ever. Messi has six Ballon d'Or awards, the most of any player, and one more than Cristiano Ronaldo.[6][7] His playing style and skills are very similar to the Argentine legend Diego Maradona because of their short height. There is much competition between him and Portuguese footballer Cristiano Ronaldo because of their similar skill levels.
Messi was born and raised in Rosario, Argentina. Messi is the third of four children of Jorge Messi and his wife Celia Cuccittini. He has two brothers named Rodrigo and Matias and two cousins named Maximiliano and Emanuel.

Messi's grandmother died when he was 11, and after that he generally celebrates his goals by pointing up in the sky in tribute of his grandmother.

Messi began football at a young age and his potential was quickly seen by Barcelona. He left Newell's Old Boys' youth team in September 2000 and moved with his family to Europe in February 2001. He officially signed with Barcelona in December 2000 on a napkin. They moved to Spain because Barcelona offered their help to treat his growth hormone deficiency, and Newell's didn't offer any help.[8]

Messi played his first professional match at 16 years old on 16 November 2003 against Porto. He played the 2003-04 season with Barcelona B. He was promoted to the first team for the 2004-05 season, and made his league debut on 16 October 2004 against Espanyol as a substitute. He made his league debut at age 17, and became the youngest player to play for Barcelona's first team in an official competition. He scored his first professional goal on 1 May 2005 against Albacete from an assist by Ronaldinho. The goal made him the youngest-ever scorer for the club at that time. Barcelona won La Liga that season for the first time in 6 years, and won the league for a second time in a row along with the Spanish Super Cup and UEFA Champions League in 2006.

His first breakthrough season was in the 2006–07 season; he became a first team regular by scoring his first hat-trick of his career in El Clásico. On 18 April 2007, he scored a goal similar to Maradona's "Goal of the Century" against England in the 1986 World Cup, where Maradona got the ball behind the halfway line on the right side and beat 4 defenders and the goalie to score. Messi's goal was similar to this; he received a pass from Xavi on the right side behind half-field, and then megged an opponent and 4 others including the goalie before finishing off with his right foot inside the penalty box.[9] In 2019, Barcelona fans voted it as the best goal in the club's history, receiving 45% of votes.[10] After Ronaldinho left the club at the end of the 2007-08 season, Messi was handed the number 10 shirt. Maybe his most successful season was the 2008–09 season. In this season, Messi scored 38 goals, including one in the Champions League final against Manchester United that Barcelona won 2–0 as part of their treble. In the following 2009–10 season, Messi scored 47 goals in all games. That equals to Ronaldo's (Brazilian) record total for Barcelona. Messi also won his first Ballon d'Or in December 2009, and also won his second a year later. He scored again in the 2011 Champions League final against their same opponent two years earlier, Manchester United. Barcelona won 3-1. Messi won his third Ballon d'Or in a row that year.

Messi played his first game with the senior team on 17 August 2005 against Hungary. He came on as a substitute. However, he was shown a red card two minutes later for hitting an opponent in the face on accident while Messi was trying to pull the opponent off from his shirt. He was very disappointed by this. Messi scored his first goal for Argentina in a friendly against Croatia on 1 March 2006. Argentina lost the game 3-2.[11] He was selected for the 2006 World Cup by coach José Pekerman. In Argentina's second game against Serbia, he became their youngest player to play at a World Cup. He also assisted a goal scored the last one in the 6–0 victory. That goal made him the youngest goalscorer in the 2006 World Cup.

Messi won the 2008 Olympics with Argentina as well, as he assisted Ángel Di Maria's goal in the final against Nigeria in Beijing. Messi was made captain of the national team in 2011. He scored his first hat-trick with the country in his 68th appearance during a 3-1 victory against Switzerland in February 2012.[12]

On 21 June 2016, he broke the top scoring record for Argentina by scoring his 55th goal with a free-kick against the United States in the Copa América Centenario. The record was held by Gabriel Batistuta with 54 goals.
On 26 June, Argentina once again lost to Chile on penalties 4-2 in the Copa América Centenario final after a 0–0 tie. Messi missed his penalty in the penalty shootout. This was Messi's third consecutive defeat in a major tournament final with Argentina, and his fourth overall. A day after the match, Messi announced his retirement from international football. In an emotional interview after the game, he said he was very sad that he missed the penalty and also sad that he wasn't able to win any trophies in four finals.[13][14]

Return from Retirement
He came out of retirement in October 2016 for the 2018 World Cup qualifiers.

After a slow start to the 2018 FIFA World Cup, he helped Argentina qualify to the next round of the competition by scoring the first goal in the 2-1 win over Nigeria.

Personal life
Relationships
Messi has three children with his wife Antonella Roccuzzo. They are named Thiago Messi, Mateo Messi and Ciro Messi. Thiago was born on 2 November 2012, Mateo was born on 11 September 2015 and Ciro was born on 10 March 2018. On the bottom of Messi's cleats is the name of his first son, Thiago.

Messi and Antonella married in June 2017.[15]

Charity
When not playing on the field, Messi finds time to do charity work. He started the Leo Messi Foundation in 2007 which helps children in at-risk situations. Messi also opened a kids park for children living in a hospital in Barcelona.

Tax Issues
In July 2016 he was convicted of tax fraud and sentenced to spend 21 months in prison. Messi was also fined two million Euros.[16] Messi never went to prison, and the problem can be solved with probation. He told the court he "only played football" and didn't know anything because he left his money problems to be dealt with by his father, Jorge Messi.

Ronaldo (born 18 September 1976) is a Brazilian football player.He has played for Brazil national team. Ronaldo started his career at Cruzeiro and moved to PSV in 1994. He joined Barcelona in 1996

Chernobyl or Chornobyl (Ukrainian: Чорнобиль) is a city in northern Ukraine, near the border with Belarus.

It was a major communications node and important center of trade and commerce, especially in the 19th century. The city is 14.5 kilometers (9 miles) south by south-east of the Chornobyl nuclear power plant, which became known for the Chornobyl disaster. The plant exploded on 26 April 1986; clouds of radioactive particles were released, and the severely damaged containment vessel started leaking radioactive matter. More than 100,000 people were evacuated from the city and other affected areas. Despite the fact that radiation is still being emitted from the nuclear disaster site, the 800-year-old city of Chornobyl survives. As of 2004, government workers still police the zone. They try to clean up radioactive material. Hundreds of people — mostly the elderly — have decided to live with the dangers and have returned to their homes in the zone's towns and villages. Their population was highest in 1987, when there were more than 1200 people. In 2003, there were about 300. There are currently 704 people living in Chornobyl, the houses that have people inside have a sign on the outside saying, Owner of this house lives here.

Artificial intelligence (AI) [1]is the ability of a computer program or a machine to think and learn. It is also a field of study which tries to make computers "smart". They work on their own without being encoded with commands. John McCarthy came up with the name "Artificial Intelligence" in 1955.

In general use, the term "artificial intelligence[1]" means a programme which mimics human cognition. At least some of the things we associate with other minds, such as learning and problem solving can be done by computers, though not in the same way as we do.[2] Andreas Kaplan and Michael Haenlein define AI as a system’s ability to correctly interpret external data, to learn from such data, and to use those learnings to achieve specific goals and tasks through flexible adaptation.[3]

An ideal (perfect) intelligent machine is a flexible agent which perceives its environment and takes actions to maximize its chance of success at some goal or objective.[4] As machines become increasingly capable, mental faculties once thought to require intelligence are removed from the definition. For example, optical character recognition is no longer perceived as an example of "artificial intelligence": it is just a routine technology.

At present we use the term AI for successfully understanding human speech,[2] competing at a high level in strategic game systems (such as Chess and Go), self-driving cars, and interpreting complex data.[5] Some people also consider AI a danger to humanity if it continues to progress at its current pace.[6]

An extreme goal of AI research is to create computer programs that can learn, solve problems, and think logically.[7][8] In practice, however, most applications have picked on problems which computers can do well. Searching data bases and doing calculations are things computers do better than people. On the other hand, "perceiving its environment" in any real sense is way beyond present-day computing.

AI involves many different fields like computer science, mathematics, linguistics, psychology, neuroscience, and philosophy. Eventually researchers hope to create a "general artificial intelligence" which can solve many problems instead of focusing on just one. Researchers are also trying to create creative and emotional AI which can possibly empathize or create art. Many approaches and tools have been tried.

Borrowing from the management literature, Kaplan and Haenlein classify artificial intelligence into three different types of AI systems: analytical, human-inspired, and humanized artificial intelligence.[3] Analytical AI has only characteristics consistent with cognitive intelligence generating cognitive representation of the world and using learning based on past experience to inform future decisions. Human-inspired AI has elements from cognitive as well as emotional intelligence, understanding, in addition to cognitive elements, also human emotions considering them in their decision making. Humanized AI shows characteristics of all types of competencies (i.e., cognitive, emotional, and social intelligence), able to be self-conscious and self-aware in interactions with others.

History
Humanoid robots were built by Yan Shi, Hero of Alexandria, and Al-Jazari. Sentient machines became popular in fiction during the 19th and 20th centuries with the stories of Frankenstein and Rossum's Universal Robots.

Formal logic was developed by ancient Greek philosophers and mathematicians. This study of logic produced the idea of a computer in the 19th and 20th centuries. Mathematician Alan Turing's theory of computation said that any mathematical problem could be solved by processing 1's and 0's. Advances in neurology, information theory, and cybernetics convinced a small group of researchers that an electronic brain was possible.

AI research really started with a conference at Dartmouth College in 1956. It was a month-long brainstorming session attended by many people with interests in AI. At the conference they wrote programs that were amazing at the time, beating people at checkers or solving word problems. The Department of Defense started giving a lot of money to AI research and labs were created all over the world.

Unfortunately, researchers really underestimated just how hard some problems were. The tools they had used still did not give computers things like emotions or common sense. Mathematician James Lighthill wrote a report on AI saying that "in no part of the field have discoveries made so far produced the major impact that was then promised".[9] The U.S and British governments wanted to fund more productive projects. Funding for AI research was cut, starting an "AI winter" where little research was done.

AI research revived in the 1980s because of the popularity of expert systems, which simulated the knowledge of a human expert. By 1985, 1 billion dollars were spent on AI. New, faster computers convinced U.S. and British governments to start funding AI research again. However, the market for Lisp machines collapsed in 1987, and funding was pulled again, starting an even longer AI winter.

AI revived again in the 90s and early 2000s with its use in data mining and medical diagnosis. This was possible because of faster computers and focusing on solving more specific problems. In 1997, Deep Blue became the first computer program to beat chess world champion Garry Kasparov. Faster computers, advances in deep learning, and access to more data have made AI popular throughout the world.[10] In 2011 IBM Watson beat the top two Jeopardy! players Brad Rutter and Ken Jennings, and in 2016 Google's AlphaGo beat top Go player Lee Sedol 4 out of 5 times.

Hinduism is not only a religion but also a way of life.[note 1] Hinduism is known to have more than one god and is widely practiced in South Asia mainly in India and Nepal. Hinduism is the oldest religion in the world,[note 2] and Hindus refer to it as Sanātana Dharma, "the eternal tradition," or the "eternal way," beyond human history.[4][5] Scholars regard Hinduism as a combination[6] of different Indian cultures and traditions,[7] with diverse roots.[8][note 3] Hinduism has no founder and origins of Hinduism is unknown.[9]. Hinduism has roots in Indus Valley civilization.[10] There was no concept of religion in India and Hinduism was not a religion. Hinduism as a religion started to develop between 500 BCE and 300 CE,[11] after the Vedic period (1500 BCE to 500 BCE).[11][12] Hinduism contains a wide range of philosophies, and is linked by the concepts, like rituals, cosmology, Texts, and pilgrimage to sacred sites. Hindu texts are divided into Śruti ("heard") and Smṛti ("remembered"). These texts discuss philosophy, mythology, Vedic yajna, Yoga, agamic rituals, and temple building, and many more.[13] Major scriptures in Hinduism include the Vedas and Upanishads, the Bhagavad Gita, and the Agamas.[14][15][16]

There are 4 goals or aims of human life, namely Dharma (duties), Artha (prosperity), Kama (desires/passions), Moksha (liberation/freedom/salvation);[17][18] karma (action, intent and consequences), Saṃsāra (cycle of rebirth), and the various Yogas (paths or practices to attain moksha).[15][19] Hindu rituals include puja (worship) and recitations, meditation, family-oriented rites of passage, annual festivals, and occasional pilgrimages. Some Hindus leave their social world and become sanyasi to achieve Moksha.[20] Hinduism prescribes the eternal duties, such as honesty, non-violence (ahimsa), patience, self-restraint, and compassion, among others.[21][22] The four largest sects of Hinduism are the Vaishnavism, Shaivism, Shaktism and Smartism.[23]

Hinduism is the world's third largest religion, There are approximately 1.15 billion Hindus which are 15-16% of the global population.[web 1][24] The vast majority of Hindus live in India, Nepal and Mauritius. Hindus are also found in other countries.

Etymology
The word Hindu is taken from the Indo-Aryan[27]/Sanskrit[28] word Sapta Sindhu, which is Sanskrit name for the Indus River which lies west of the border of India and Pakistan.[28][note 4] According to Gavin Flood, The word Hindu was used by Persians for the people who live beyond the Indus River,[28] Inscription of Darius I which was written around 550–486 BCE also refer Hindu as the people who live beyond the Indus River.[29] These records didn't refer Hindu as a religion.[28] The earliest record which refer Hindu as religion may be the 7th-century CE Chinese text Record of the Western Regions by Xuanzang,[29] and 14th-century Persian text Futuhu's-salatin by 'Abd al-Malik Isami.[note 5] This is because the name if the religion is called Hinduism, not Hindu.

The Arabic term al-Hind referred to the people who live across the River Indus.[37] It means "Land of Hindus" which is what it stood for until Muslims started to come into India.

The term Hindu was later used in some Sanskrit texts such as the later Rajataranginis of Kashmir (Hinduka, c. 1450) and some 16th- to 18th-century Bengali Gaudiya Vaishnava texts including Chaitanya Charitamrita and Chaitanya Bhagavata. These texts used to distinguish Hindus from Muslims who are called Yavanas (foreigners) or Mlecchas (barbarians), with the 16th-century Chaitanya Charitamrita text and the 17th century Bhakta Mala text using the phrase "Hindu dharma".[38] In the end of the 18th century the European merchants and colonists began to call followers of Indian religions collectively as Hindus. The term Hinduism, then spelled Hindooism, was introduced into the English language in the 18th-century to denote the religious, philosophical, and cultural traditions native to India.[39]

Definitions
Hinduism is diverse on ideas on spirituality and traditions, but has no ecclesiastical order, no unquestionable religious authorities, no governing body, no prophet(s) nor any binding holy book; Hindus can choose to be polytheistic, pantheistic, monotheistic, monistic, agnostic, atheistic or humanist.[40][41][42] Because of the wideness and openness of Hinduism, arriving at a definition is difficult.[28] [43] Hinduism has been defined as a religion, a religious tradition, a set of religious beliefs, and "a way of life."[44][note 1] From a Western point of view, Hinduism like other faiths is referred to as a religion. In India the term dharma is preferred, which is broader than the western term religion.

The study of India and its cultures and religions, and the definition of "Hinduism", has been shaped by the interests of colonialism and by Western notions of religion.[45] Since the 1990s, those influences and its outcomes have been the topic of debate among scholars of Hinduism,[46][note 6] and have also been taken over by critics of the Western view on India.[47][note 7]

Beliefs

Temple wall panel relief sculpture at the Hoysaleswara temple in Halebidu, representing the Trimurti: Brahma, Shiva and Vishnu.
Hindu beliefs include (but are not restricted to) Dharma (ethics/duties), Samsāra (the continuing cycle of birth, life, death and rebirth), Karma (Every action has a reaction), Moksha (liberation from samsara or liberation in this life), and the various Yogas (paths or practices).[19]

Purusharthas (objectives of human life)
Main article: Purusharthas
See also: Initiation, Dharma, Artha, Kāma, and Mokṣa
Hindism have accepted four proper goals or aims of human life: Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha. These are known as the Puruṣārthas:[17][18]

Dharma (righteousness, ethics)
Dharma is considered one of the most important goal of a human being in Hinduism.[48] Dharma is considered Important because it is dharma which makes running of Universe and life possible,[49] and includes duties, virtues and "right way of living".[50] Hindu Dharma includes the religious duties, moral rights and duties of each individual, as well as behaviors that enable social order, right conduct, and those that are virtuous.[50] The Brihadaranyaka Upanishad states it as:

Nothing is higher than Dharma. The weak overcomes the stronger by Dharma, as over a king. Truly that Dharma is the Truth (Satya); Therefore, when a man speaks the Truth, they say, "He speaks the Dharma"; and if he speaks Dharma, they say, "He speaks the Truth!" For both are one.

— Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, 1.4.xiv [51][52]
In the Mahabharata, Krishna says it is Dharma which is holding both this-worldly and other-worldly affairs. (Mbh 12.110.11). The word Sanātana means eternal, perennial, or forever; thus, Sanātana Dharma means that it is the dharma that has neither beginning nor end.[53]

Artha (livelihood, wealth)
Artha is second goal of life in Hinduism which means pursuit of wealth for livelihood, and economic prosperity. It includes political life, diplomacy and material well-being. The Artha includes all "means of life", activities and resources that enables one to be in a state one wants to be in, wealth, career and financial security.[54] The aim of artha is considered an important aim of human life in Hinduism.[55][56]

Kāma (sensual pleasure)
Main article: Kama
Kāma (Sanskrit, Pali; Devanagari: काम) means desire, wish, passion, pleasure of the senses, the enjoyment of life, affection, or love, with or without sexual connotations.[57][58] In Hinduism, Kama is considered an important and healthy goal of human life when pursued without sacrificing Dharma, Artha and Moksha.[59]

Mokṣa (liberation, freedom from samsara)
Main article: Moksha
Moksha (Sanskrit: मोक्ष mokṣa) or mukti (Sanskrit: मुक्ति) is the ultimate, most important goal in Hinduism. In one school Moksha means liberation from sorrow, suffering and saṃsāra (birth-rebirth cycle).[60][61] In other schools of Hinduism, such as monistic, moksha means self-realization,"realizing the whole universe as the Self".[62][63]

Karma and samsara
Main article: Karma
Karma means action, work, or deed,[64] and also the vedic theory of cause and effect".[65][66] The theory is a combination of (1) causality that may be moral or non-moral; (2) moralization, that is good or bad actions have consequences; and (3) rebirth.[67] Karma theory means ''Whatever experience currently a man have is due to his/her past work''. These actions may be in a person's current life, or, in some schools of Hinduism, actions in their past lives.[67][68] This cycle of birth, life, death and rebirth is called samsara. Liberation from samsara through moksha is believed to ensure lasting happiness and peace.[69][70] Hindu scriptures teach that the future depends on the current action and our past deeds.

Moksha
The ultimate goal of life,according to Hinduism is moksha, nirvana or samadhi, but is understood in different ways in different schools.For example, Advaita Vedanta says that after attaining moksha a person knows their "soul, self" and identifies it as one with Brahman (Ultimate reality or cause of everything).[71][72] The followers of Dvaita (dualistic) schools,state that after attaining moksha a person identify "soul, self" different from Brahman but very close to Brahman, and after attaining moksha one will spend eternity in a loka (higher planes). According to theistic schools of Hinduism, moksha is liberation from samsara, while for other schools such as the monistic school, moksha is possible in current life and is a psychological concept.

Concept of God
Main articles: Ishvara and God in Hinduism
Hinduism is diverse and Hinduism include monotheism, polytheism, panentheism, pantheism, pandeism, monism, and atheism among others;[40][73][web 2] Basically it depends on individuals choice and that's why sometimes Hinduism is referred to as henotheistic (i.e., involving devotion to a single god while accepting the existence of others), but any such term is an over generalization.[74]

Gods and Goddesses in Hinduism
Shiva
Durga
Lakshmi
Vishnu
Hindus believe that all living creatures have a soul. This soul or true "self" of every living being is called the ātman. The soul is believed to be eternal.[75] According to the monistic/pantheistic (non-dualist) theologies of Hinduism (such as Advaita Vedanta school), this Atman is indistinct from Brahman.[76] The goal of life, according to the Advaita school, is to realise that one's soul is identical to supreme soul, that the supreme soul is present in everything and everyone, all life is interconnected and there is oneness in all life.[77][78][79] Dualistic schools (see Dvaita and Bhakti) sees Brahman as a Supreme Being separate from individual souls.[80] They worship the Supreme Being variously as Vishnu, Brahma, Shiva, or Shakti, depending upon the sect. God is called Ishvara, Bhagavan, Parameshwara, Devadu or Devi, and these terms have different meanings in different schools of Hinduism.[81][82][83] Devi is typically used when refereeing to a female goddess.

[84][85][86]

The Hindu scriptures refer to celestial entities called Devas (or devī in feminine form; devatā used synonymously for Deva in Hindi), which in English means demi-gods or heavenly beings.[note 8] The devas are an integral part of Hindu culture and are depicted in art, architecture and through icons, and stories about them are related in the scriptures, particularly in Indian epic poetry and the Puranas. They are, however, often distinguished from Ishvara, a personal god, with many Hindus worshipping Ishvara in one of its particular manifestations as their iṣṭa devatā, or chosen ideal.[87][88] The choice is a matter of individual preference,[89] and of regional and family traditions.[89][note 9] The multitude of Devas are considered as manifestations of Brahman.[note 10]

Main traditions
Main article: Hindu denominations

A Ganesha-centric Panchayatana ("five deities", from the Smarta tradition): Ganesha (centre) with Shiva (top left), Devi (top right), Vishnu (bottom left) and Surya (bottom right). All these deities also have separate sects dedicated to them.
Hinduism has no central doctrinal authority and Hindus do not claim to belong to any particular sect or tradition.[91] Four major sects in Hinduism are: Vaishnavism, Shaivism, Shaktism and Smarthism.[92][93]

Vaishnavism is the tradition that worships Vishnu[94] and his avatars, such as Krishna and Rama.[95] The people of this sect are generally non-ascetic, monastic.[96] These practices include community dancing, singing of Kirtans and Bhajans, with sound and music believed by some to have meditative and spiritual powers.[97]

Shaivism is the tradition that focuses on Shiva. Shaivas are more attracted to ascetic individualism, and it has several sub-schools.[96] Their practices include Bhakti-style devotion but they leaned to philosply such as Advaita and Yoga.[92][97] Some Shaivas worship in temples, but some practice yoga, striving to be one with Shiva within.[98] Shaivas visualize god as half male, half female, as a combination of the male and female principles (Ardhanarishvara). Shaivism is related to Shaktism, wherein Shakti is seen as wife of Shiva.[92] Shaivism is mainly practiced in the Himalayan north from Kashmir to Nepal, and in south India.[99]

Shaktism focuses on goddess worship of Shakti or Devi as cosmic mother,[96] and it is mainly worshipped in northeastern and eastern states of India such as Assam and Bengal. Devi is depicted as in gentler forms like Parvati, the consort of Shiva; or, as warrior goddesses like Kali and Durga.[100] Community celebrations include festivals, some of which include processions and idol immersion into sea or other water bodies.[101]

Smartism worship all the major Hindu deities like Shiva, Vishnu, Shakti, Ganesha, Surya and Skanda.[102] The Smarta tradition developed during the (early) Classical Period of Hinduism around the beginning of the Common Era, when Hinduism emerged from the interaction between Brahmanism and local traditions.[103][104] The Smarta tradition is very much same as Advaita Vedanta, and consider Adi Shankara as its founder or reformer, who considered worship of God-with-attributes (saguna Brahman) as a journey towards ultimately realizing God-without-attributes (nirguna Brahman, Atman, Self-knowledge).[105][106]

Hindu texts
Hindu text are world's oldest and had been written in Sanskrit and Tamil. The oldest Text is Rig Veda which is about 4000 years old.Hindu Texts can be divided in two parts:

Shruti (what is heard)
Smriti (what is remembered)
Shruti
Shruti or Shruthi (Sanskrit: श्रुति; IAST: Śruti; IPA/Sanskrit: [ʃrut̪i]) in Sanskrit means "that which is heard" These ancient religious texts comprising the central canon of Hinduism includes the four Vedas including its four types of attached texts - the Samhitas, the Brahmanas, the Aranyakas and the early Upanishads

Smriti
Smriti (Sanskrit: स्मृति, IAST: Smṛti), means "that which is remembered" are a body of Hindu texts. Smriti were the texts which were remembered and were spread through mouth from generation to generation. Smriti includes (the Mahābhārata and Rāmāyana), the Dharmasūtras and Dharmaśāstras (or Smritiśāstras), the Arthasaśāstras, the Purānas, the Kāvya or poetical literature.

Festivals
There are many Hindu Festivals celebrated throughout the world but mainly in India and Nepal. These festivals include worship, offerings to deities, fasting, rituals, fairs, charity, celebrations, Puja, etc. The festivals mainly celebrate events from Hindu mythology, changes in season, changes in Solar System. Different sects celebrate different festivals but festivals like Diwali, Holi, Shivratri, Raksha Bandhan, Janamashtmi etc. are celebrated by the majority of Hindus.

History
Periodisation
Hinduism can be divided in following ages

Prevedic religions (pre-history and Indus Valley Civilisation; until c. 1500 BCE);
Vedic period (c. 1500–500 BCE);
"Second Urbanisation" (c. 500–200 BCE);
Classical Hinduism (c. 200 BCE-1100 CE);[note 20]
Pre-classical Hinduism (c. 200 BCE-300 CE);
"Golden Age" (Gupta Empire) (c. 320–650 CE);
Late-Classical Hinduism - Puranic Hinduism (c. 650–1100 CE);
Islam and sects of Hinduism (c. 1200–1700 CE);
Modern Hinduism (from c. 1800).
Origins

The Pashupati seal, Indus Valley civilization
The origins of Hinduism are unknown but the earliest traces of Hinduism come from Mesolithic in the sites such as the rock paintings of Bhimbetka rock shelters dating to a period of 30,000 BCE or older,[note 11] as well as neolithic times.[note 12] Some of the religious practices can be considered to have originated in 4000 BCE. Several tribal religions still exist, though their practices may not resemble those of prehistoric religions.[web 3]

Varna
According to one view, the Varna, which later transformed into caste system during the British rule, shows how strongly many have felt about each person following his or her dharma, or destined path. Many Hindus say it goes against the true meaning of dharma. However, Varna plays a big role in Hindu society. It's later transformation as Caste system by the British rule of India lost favor and became illegal after the independence of India.

Temples
Puja (worship) takes place in the Mandir (temple). Mandirs vary in size from small village shrines to large buildings, surrounded by walls. People can also visit the Mandir at any time to pray and participate in the bhajans (religious songs). Hindus also worship at home and often have a special room with a shrine to particular gods.

Temple construction in India started nearly 2000 years ago. The oldest temples that were built of brick and wood no longer exist. Stone later became the preferred material. Temples marked the transition of Hinduism from the Vedic religion of ritual sacrifices to a religion of Bhakti or love and devotion to a personal deity. Temple construction and mode of worship is governed by ancient Sanskrit scriptures called agamas, of which there are several, which deal with individual deities. There are substantial differences in architecture, customs, rituals and traditions in temples in different parts of India. During the ritual consecration of a temple, the presence of the universal all-encompassing Brahman is invoked into the main stone deity of the temple, through ritual, thereby making the deity and the temple sacred and divine

Alternative cultures of worship
The Bhakti schools
The Bhakti (Devotional) school takes its name from the Hindu term that signifies a blissful, selfless and overwhelming love of God as the beloved Father, Mother, Child, or whatever relationship finds appeal in the devotee's heart. The philosophy of Bhakti seeks to tap into the universal divinity through personal form, which explains the proliferation of so many gods and goddesses in India, often reflecting the singular inclinations of small regions or groups of people. Seen as a form of Yoga, or union, it seeks to dissolve the ego in God, since consciousness of the body and limited mind as self is seen to be a divisive factor in spiritual realization. Essentially, it is God who effects all change, who is the source of all works, who acts through the devotee as love and light. 'Sins' and evil-doings of the devotee are said to fall away of their own accord, the devotee shriven, limitedness even transcended, through the love of God. The Bhakti movements rejuvenated Hinduism through their intense expression of faith and their responsiveness to the emotional and philosophical needs of India. They can rightly be said to have affected the greatest wave of change in Hindu prayer and ritual since ancient times.

The most popular means of expressing love for God in the Hindu tradition has been through puja, or ritual devotion, frequently using the aid of a murti (statue) in conjunction with the singing or chanting of meditational prayer in the form of mantras.

Devotional songs called bhajans (written primarily from the 14th-17th centuries), kirtan (praise), and arti (a filtered down form of Vedic fire ritual) are sometimes sung in conjunction with performance of puja. This rather organic system of devotion attempts to aid the individual in connecting with God through symbolic medium. It is said, however, that the bhakta, through a growing connection with God, is eventually able to avoid all external form and is immersed entirely in the bliss of undifferentiated Love in Truth.

Altogether, bhakti resulted in a mass of devotional literature, music and art that has enriched the world and gave India renewed spiritual impetus, one eschewing unnecessary ritual and artificial social boundaries. See bhakti yoga for more.

Tantrism
Main article: Tantra
According to the most famous Western Tantrik scholar, Sir John Woodroffe (pseudonym Arthur Avalon): "The Indian Tantras, which are numerous, constitute the Scripture (Shastra) of the Kaliyuga, and as such are the voluminous source of present and practical orthodox 'Hinduism'. The Tantra Shastra is, in fact, and whatever be its historical origin, a development of the Vaidika Karmakanda, promulgated to meet the needs of that age. Shiva says: 'For the benefit of men of the Kali age, men bereft of energy and dependent for existence on the food they eat, the Kaula doctrine, O auspicious one! is given' (Chap. IX., verse 12). To the Tantra we must therefore look if we would understand aright both ritual, yoga, and sadhana of all kinds, as also the general principles of which these practices are but the objective expression." (Introduction to Sir John Woodroffe's translation of "Mahanirvana Tantra.")

The word "tantra" means "treatise" or "continuum", and is applied to a variety of mystical, occult, medical and scientific works as well as to those which we would now regard as "tantric". Most tantras were written in the late Middle Ages and sprang from Hindu cosmology and Yoga.

Important symbolism and themes in Hinduism
Ahimsa and the cow
Many Hindus are vegetarians (do not eat meat) because of their respect for life. About 30% of today's Hindu population, especially in orthodox communities in South India, in certain northerly states like Gujarat, and in many Brahmin areas around the subcontinent, are vegetarian.

Most Hindus who do eat meat do not eat beef. Some do not even use leather products. This is most likely because many Hindus have relied so heavily on the cow for all sorts of dairy products, tilling of fields and fuel for fertiliser that its status as a willing 'caretaker' of humanity grew to identifying it as an almost motherly figure. Thus, while most Hindus do not worship the cow, and rules against eating beef arose long after the Vedas had been written, it still has an honored place in Hindu society. It is said that Krishna is both Govinda (herder of cows) and Gopala (protector of cows), and Shiva's attendant is Nandi, the bull. With the stress on vegetarianism (which is usually followed even by meat-eating Hindus on religious days or special occasions) and the sacred nature of the cow, it is no wonder that most holy cities and areas in India have a ban on selling meat-products and there is a movement among Hindus to ban cow-slaughter not only in specific regions, but in all of India.

Hindu symbols
Hindus use many symbols and signs. The two most important symbols used by Hindus are the "Aum" and the "Swastika (Hinduism)".

Forms of worship: murtis and mantras
Contrary to popular belief, practiced Hinduism is neither polytheistic nor strictly monotheistic. The various Hindu gods and avatars that are worshipped by Hindus are understood as different forms of One truth, sometimes seen as beyond a mere god and as a formless Divine Ground (Brahman), akin but not limited to monism, or as one monotheistic principle like Vishnu or Shiva.

Whether believing in the One source as formless (nirguna brahman, without attributes) or as a personal god (saguna Brahman, with attributes), Hindus understand that the one truth may be seen as different to different people. Hinduism encourages devotees to describe and develop a personal relationship with their chosen deity (ishta devata) in the form of a god or goddess.

While some censuses hold worshippers of one form or another of Vishnu (known as Vaishnavs) to be at 80% and those of Shiva (called Shaivaites) and Shakti at the remaining 20%, such figures are perhaps misleading. The vast majority of Hindus worship many gods as varicolored forms of the same prism of Truth. Among the most popular are Vishnu (as Krishna or Rama), Shiva, Devi (the Mother as many female deities, such as Lakshmi, Saraswati, Kali and Durga), Ganesha, Skanda and Hanuman.

Worship of the said deities is often done through the aid of pictures or icons (murti) which are said not to be God themselves but conduits for the devotee's consciousness, markers for the human soul that signify the ineffable and illimitable nature of the love and grandeur of God. They are symbols of the greater principle, representing and are never presumed to be the concept or entity itself. Thus, Hindu image worship is a form of iconolatry, in which the symbols are venerated as putative sigils of divinity, as opposed to idolatry, a charge often levied (erroneously) at Hindus. For more details on this form of worship, see murti.

Mantra
Hindus use several prayers and group of words. Some group of words are called mantras. These words are said to give the speaker a deeper concentration and understanding, thus coming closer to Brahman. A well known mantra is om or aum. It symbolizes Brahman, and is often the opening word in many prayers. To pronounce a mantra well, you should say it slowly, and in a deep voice.

Geographic distribution
The nations of India, Mauritius, and Nepal as well as the Indonesian island of Bali have more people who are Hindus than people who are not Hindus.In these nations, specially Nepal and India Hinduism is very popular. These countries also have many Hindus:

Bangladesh (12 million),
Sri Lanka (2.5 million),
the United States (2.0 million)
Pakistan (3.3 million),
South Africa (1.2 million),
the United Kingdom (1.2 million),
Malaysia (1.1 million),
Canada (0.7 million),
Fiji (0.5 million),
Trinidad and Tobago (0.5 million),
Guyana (0.4 million),
the Netherlands (0.4 million),
Singapore (0.3 million)
Myanmar (0.3 million),
Suriname (0.2 million),
Australia (0.1 Million).
There are also strong Hindu communities in the countries of the ex-Soviet Union, especially in Russia and Poland. The Indonesian islands of Java, Sulawesi, Sumatra, and Borneo also have big native Hindu populations. In its Yoga stream, Hinduism is even more widespread all over the world with 30 million (less than one percent can not be 30 million for US population) Hindus in the United States alone.

== Introduction ==
The Messi–Ronaldo rivalry is an association football rivalry between Argentine forward Lionel Messi and Portuguese forward Cristiano Ronaldo. Having won a combined eleven Ballon d'Or/FIFA Ballon d'Or awards (six for Messi and five for Ronaldo) and ten European Golden Shoe awards (six for Messi and four for Ronaldo), both are widely regarded as two of the greatest players of all time. They are two of the most decorated football players ever, having won a combined 66 trophies (Ronaldo 32, Messi 34) during their senior careers thus far, and have regularly broken the 50-goal barrier in a single season. They are amongst the 51 players in the history of the sport to score over 500 career goals, with both having scored over 700 goals each in their careers for club and country. Ronaldo currently holds the world record for most official goals in a career, while Messi has the superior goals-to-games ratio (0.81, to Ronaldo's 0.73).Journalists and pundits regularly argue the individual merits of both players in an attempt to establish who they believe is the best attacker in modern football or ever. Regardless of preference, football critics generally agree that both are the greatest players of their generation, outperforming their peers numerically, largely by a significant margin. Messi's combination of dribbling, technical, playmaking, and goalscoring skills is often considered among the very best in history, while Ronaldo's physical attributes, goalscoring skills, leadership and influence under pressure is well-appreciated worldwide. It has been compared to past global sports rivalries such as the Magic Johnson-Larry Bird rivalry in basketball, the Muhammad Ali–Joe Frazier rivalry in boxing, the Roger Federer–Rafael Nadal rivalry and the Björn Borg–John McEnroe rivalry in tennis, and the Alain Prost–Ayrton Senna rivalry in Formula One motor racing. Some commentators choose to analyse the differing physiques and playing styles of the two, while part of the debate revolves around the contrasting personalities of the two players; Ronaldo is often described as someone of temperamental character while Messi is considered to have a more reserved character.At club level, Messi and Ronaldo represented rivals FC Barcelona and Real Madrid CF for nearly a decade. The two players faced each other at least twice every season in the world's most popular regular-season club game, El Clásico (among the most viewed annual sporting events), from Ronaldo's arrival at Madrid in 2009 until his transfer to Italian club Juventus F.C. in 2018. Off the field, they are also the face of two rival sportswear manufacturers, Messi of Adidas and Ronaldo of Nike, which are also the kit suppliers of their national teams and the opposite for their clubs. The two highest-paid players in football, Messi and Ronaldo are among the world's best-paid sports stars in combined income from salaries, bonuses and off-field earnings. In 2018, Messi topped Ronaldo on the Forbes' list of highest-paid sportspeople, earning $111 million, with Ronaldo next on the list at $108 million.

---

== History ==
In 2007, Ronaldo and Messi finished as runners-up to A.C. Milan's Kaká in both the Ballon d'Or, an award rewarded to the player voted as the best in the world by an international panel of sports journalists; and the FIFA World Player of the Year, an award voted for by coaches and captains of international teams. In an interview that year, Messi was quoted as saying that "Cristiano Ronaldo is an extraordinary player and it would be brilliant to be in the same team as him."They first played in a game against each other when Manchester United were drawn to play Barcelona in the 2007–08 UEFA Champions League semi-finals and were immediately pitted as major rivals. Ronaldo missed a penalty in the first leg, but United eventually advanced to the final via a Paul Scholes goal. At the end of the year, Ronaldo was awarded the Ballon d'Or and vowed that he would win the award again.The 2009 UEFA Champions League Final was contested between Manchester United and Barcelona on 27 May 2009 at the Stadio Olimpico in Rome, Italy. The match, described as a "dream clash", was again hyped as the latest battle between the two, this time to settle who was the best player in the world; Ronaldo claimed he was the better of the two, while Messi's club-mate Xavi sided with him. Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson was more diplomatic, praising both players as being amongst the world's elite talents. Messi, playing in a central role he was unaccustomed to so he would avoid a direct battle with Manchester United left-back Patrice Evra, scored Barcelona's second in a 2–0 victory with a header in the 70th minute. Meanwhile, Ronaldo was subdued for much of the game, despite some early chances to score, and his frustration eventually showed when he was booked for a rash tackle on Carles Puyol.From 2009 to 2018, the two played against each other at least twice per season during El Clásico matches but also met many other times competitions such as the Copa del Rey, the Supercopa de España, and, a two-legged Champions League semifinal in 2011. Messi won four consecutive Ballon d'Or awards (2009 to 2012), with a fifth coming in 2015, while Ronaldo had equalled Messi's total of five with wins in 2013, 2014, 2016, and 2017. In 2019, Messi took the lead again by earning his sixth Ballon d'Or, finishing just seven points ahead of second-placed Virgil van Dijk, with Ronaldo finishing third. In total, Messi and Ronaldo reached the podium a record twelve times each. Messi won two Champions League while Ronaldo was playing for Real Madrid, with the latter securing four out of five titles between 2014 and 2018. Messi during this period won five Pichichi trophies and European Golden Shoe awards (2010, 2012, 2013, 2017 and 2018), while Ronaldo won these prizes thrice each (2011, 2014 and 2015). From 2009 to 2018, Ronaldo was the Champions League top scorer on six occasions, with Messi achieving this feat four times (including in 2015 when the pair finished joint-top).

---

== Relationship between Messi and Ronaldo ==
In a 2015 interview, Ronaldo commented on the rivalry by saying: "I think we push each other sometimes in the competition, this is why the competition is so high." Alex Ferguson, Ronaldo's manager during his time at Manchester United, opined: "I don't think the rivalry against each other bothers them. I think they have their own personal pride in terms of wanting to be the best." Messi has denied any rivalry, and blames the media for creating it, stating that "only the media, the press, who wants us to be at loggerheads but I've never fought with Cristiano."It is widely argued and documented that there is an atmosphere of competition between the duo, with Guillem Balagué claiming in the book Ronaldo that he refers to his Argentine counterpart as a "motherfucker" behind his back, and Luca Caioli saying in his book Ronaldo: The Obsession for Perfection that, according to his sources, Ronaldo heats up when watching Messi play. In response to claims that he and Messi do not get on well on a personal level, Ronaldo commented: "We don't have a relationship outside the world of football, just as we don't with a lot of other players", before adding that in years to come he hopes they can laugh about it together, stating: "We have to look on this rivalry with a positive spirit, because it's a good thing." On 13 November 2014, Ronaldo also threatened to take legal action over the remarks made by Balagué. After Ronaldo's departure from Real Madrid to Juventus, Messi admitted to missing him, saying: "I miss Cristiano. Although it was a bit difficult to see him win trophies, he gave La Liga prestige." During a joint interview at the UEFA Player of the Year ceremony in 2019, Ronaldo said he would like to "have dinner together in the future", to which Messi later replied: "If I get an invitation, why not?"

---

== Awards and records ==
Throughout the existence of the rivalry, the pair have dominated awards ceremonies and broken a multitude of goalscoring records for both club and country, feats which have been described as "incredible", "ridiculous", and "remarkable", respectively. The rivalry itself has been described as one about records and reputation of the players, rather than one based in loathing.Messi is the all-time La Liga top scorer, as well as having the most goal contributions (goals + assists) in the history of the top European leagues, with comfortably over 1,000 totals; meanwhile, Ronaldo places second for goals scored and in third for assists provided, whilst being the UEFA Champions League all-time top goalscorer and assist provider, with Messi in second for both goals scored and assists provided in the competition's history, although once more having a superior ratio of goal contributions to games. Messi also holds both the most goals in a season (73), and second most assists in a season (34), just one behind midfielder Juan Mata's record. He is the outright holder of most goal contributions in a season, with 107 in 2011–12. The two had broken each other's record over the course of 2015 after Messi surpassed the previous record holder Raúl in November 2014. Ronaldo opened a gap in the 2015–16 season when he became the first player to score double figures in the group stage of the Champions League, setting the record at 11 goals. They are the first two players to score 100 goals in UEFA Champions League history.They dominated the Ballon d'Or/The Best FIFA Men's Player awards since 2008, and UEFA Men's Player of the Year Award since 2014; in 2018, their roughly decade-long triumph was ended by Luka Modrić, seen as "the end of an era." In an interview for the France Football, Modrić stated that "history will say that a Croatian player, representing his small country, won the Ballon d'Or after Cristiano Ronaldo and Lionel Messi, who are players at another level. Nobody has the right to compare themselves to them." Since 2008, Messi has won six Ballons d'Or to Ronaldo's five, six FIFA World's Best Player awards to Ronaldo's five, and six European Golden Shoes to Ronaldo's four.Collectively, Ronaldo has won 32 major trophies including seven league titles and five Champions Leagues, and guided Portugal to their first trophies UEFA Euro 2016 and the 2019 UEFA Nations League. He has also won four national cups, two league cups, six national super cups, two European Super Cups, and four FIFA Club World Cups.Messi has won a club record 34 major trophies as a Barcelona player, including ten league titles, four Champions Leagues, seven Copa del Rey titles, seven Spanish Super Cups, three European Super Cups, and three FIFA Club World Cups. As for youth competitions, Messi won a gold medal at the 2008 Olympic Games held in China, and he had previously won the FIFA U-20 World Cup in 2005, being elected best player and top scorer of the tournament. Moreover, Messi was runner-up at three Copa Américas and at the 2014 World Cup, before finally claiming his first major international trophy at the 2021 Copa América where he was named joint-best player and top scorer.

---

== Head-to-head ==
In past years, it had been said that the rivalry between Real Madrid and Barcelona has been "encapsulated" by the individual rivalry between Ronaldo and Messi, with there never being a goalless El Clásico between the two.

== Introduction ==

The Messi-Ronaldo rivalry is a football rivalry between two very good football players: Cristiano Ronaldo and Lionel Messi. Many people think that both Messi and Ronaldo are the best players in the world today. Both have won the Ballon d'Or many times, six for Messi and five for Ronaldo, as well as many other awards, such as the European Golden Shoe. They are two of the most successful football players ever, having won a combined 66 trophies. Messi has won 34 trophies in his senior career, and Ronaldo has won 32 trophies in his senior career. They are the only two players in the history of the sport to score 500 or more goals in a single season. They have both scored over 700 goals in their careers. Ronaldo currently holds the world record for most official goals in a career, while Messi has the superior goals-to-games ratio (0.81, to Ronaldo's 0.73). Many people think that Ronaldo is the best player in the world today, while some people think that Messi is the best player ever. No matter what people think, football people generally agree that both are the greatest players of their time. Many people think they are the best players of their time. Messi's combination of dribbling, technical, playmaking, and goalscoring skills is often considered among the very best in history, while Ronaldo's leadership and influence under pressure is well-appreciated worldwide. It has been compared to past global sports rivalries such as the Muhammad Ali-Joe Frazier rivalry in boxing, the Alain Prost-Ayrton Senna rivalry in Formula One motor racing, the Björn Borg-John McEnroe rivalry in tennis, and the Roger Federer-Rafael Nadal rivalry in tennis. Some commentators choose to analyse the differing physiques and playing styles of the two, while part of the debate revolves around the contrasting personalities of the two players; Messi is often described as a player with a strong personality, while Ronaldo is considered to have a more reserved character. The two players play against each other at least twice every season in the world's most popular regular-season club game, El Clásico. Since Ronaldo joined Madrid in 2009, they have played against each other at least twice every season. in 2018. Off the field, they are also the face of two rival sportswear manufacturers, Adidas and Nike. Adidas and Nike both supply the national teams of both Messi and Ronaldo. The two highest-paid players in football, Messi and Ronaldo are among the world's best-paid sports stars. They both make a lot of money from their jobs. In 2018, Messi made $111 million on the Forbes list of the world's most paid sportspeople. Ronaldo made $108 million on the list. 

== History ==

In 2007, Ronaldo and Messi finished as runners-up to A.C. Milan's Kaká in both the Ballon d'Or and the FIFA World Player of the Year. The Ballon d'Or is an award given to the best player in the world by an international group of sports journalists. In an interview that year, Messi said that he would like to play with Ronaldo. He said that "Cristiano Ronaldo is an extraordinary player. They first played against each other when Manchester United were playing Barcelona in the UEFA Champions League in 2007. They played against each other for the first time in this game. In the first leg, Ronaldo missed a penalty. In the end, Paul Scholes scored United's goal. At the end of the year, Ronaldo was awarded the Ballon d'Or and said that he would win the award again. The 2009 UEFA Champions League Final was played on May 27, 2009 at the Stadio Olimpico in Rome, Italy. The match, described as a "dream clash", was again hyped as the latest battle between the two, with Messi's club-mate Xavi saying that Ronaldo was the better player, while Ronaldo said that he was the best player in the world. Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson thought that both players were very good. He said that they were the best in the world. Messi, playing in a central role so he would not have to fight with Manchester United left-back Patrice Evra, scored Barcelona's second goal in a 2-0 victory. He scored the goal in the 70th minute. Meanwhile, Ronaldo was subdued for much of the game, despite some early chances to score, and his frustration eventually showed when he was booked for a rash tackle on Carles Puyol. The two have played against each other at least twice a season since the beginning of the 2009\/10 season, including a two-legged Champions League semifinal in 2011. Messi has won the Ballon d'Or four times in a row (2009 to 2012), while Ronaldo has won it five times. Ronaldo won the award in 2013, 2014, 2016, and 2017. In 2019, Messi took the lead again by earning his sixth Ballon d'Or. He finished just seven points ahead of second-placed Virgil van Dijk, with Ronaldo third. In total, Messi and Ronaldo have both won the World Cup twelve times. While Ronaldo was playing for Real Madrid, Messi won two Champions League games. Real Madrid have won four out of five titles since 2014. During this time, Messi has won five Pichichi trophies and three European Golden Shoe awards. Ronaldo has won these awards three times, once each in 2011, 2014 and 2015. From 2009 to 2018, Ronaldo has scored more goals in the Champions League than Messi four times. In 2015, the two players finished as the top scorers together. 

== Relationship between Messi and Ronaldo ==

In a 2015 interview, Ronaldo talked about the rivalry. He said: "Sometimes we push each other a little bit, that's why the competition is so good. Alex Ferguson, who managed Ronaldo when he was at Manchester United, said that he does not care about the other players. I think they have their own personal pride. They want to be the best at it." Messi has denied any rivalry, and blames the media for creating it. He said that "only the media, the press, wants us to be at loggerheads (not playing against each other). "It is widely argued and documented that there is an atmosphere of competition between the duo, with Luca Caioli saying in his book Ronaldo: The Obsession for Perfection that, according to his sources, Ronaldo heats up when watching Messi play, and Guillem Balagué claiming in the book that he refers to his Argentine counterpart as a "motherfucker" behind his back. He has said that he and Messi do not get on well on a personal level, and that they do not have a good relationship outside of football. He said that they do not have a good relationship with a lot of other players, and that in years to come he hopes they can laugh about it together. On 13 November 2014, Ronaldo also said that he would take legal action against Balagué. After Ronaldo left Real Madrid to join Juventus, Messi said that he "missed" him, "I miss Cristiano". It was a little hard for him to win trophies, but he gave La Liga importance." During a joint interview at the UEFA Player of the Year ceremony in 2019, Ronaldo said he would like to "have dinner together in the future", to which Messi said: "If I get an invitation, why not?" 

== Awards and records ==

Throughout the existence of the rivalry, the pair have dominated awards ceremonies and broken many goalscoring records for both club and country. People have said that they are both "incredible" and "remarkable" for having scored so many goals. Messi is the all-time La Liga top scorer, as well as having the most goal contributions (goals + assists) in the history of the top European leagues, while being the UEFA Champions League all-time top goalscorer and assist provider. Ronaldo is the UEFA Champions League all-time top goalscorer and assist provider, with Messi in second for both goals scored and assists provided in the competition's history, although once more having a superior ratio of goal contributions to games.  Messi also holds the record for most goals in a season with 73. He also holds the record for most assists with 34. He has scored the most goals in a single season with 107 in the 2011 â "12 season. The two had broken each other's record over the course of 2015. In November 2014, Messi beat the previous record holder. In the 2015/16 season, he became the first player in history to score double figures in the Champions League group stage, setting the record at 11 goals. They are the first two players to score 100 goals in UEFA Champions League history. They have won the Ballon d'Or/The Best FIFA Men's Player awards since 2008, and UEFA Men's Player of the Year Award since 2014; Luka Modrić won the award for the first time in his career in 2018. In an interview for the France Football, Modrić said that "history will say that a Croatian player, representing his small country, won the Ballon d'Or after Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo. No one should compare themselves to them." Since 2008, Messi has won six Ballons d'Or to Ronaldo's five, six FIFA World's Best Player awards to Ronaldo's five, and six European Golden Shoes to Ronaldo's four. In that time, Messi has won seven league titles and five Champions Leagues, while Ronaldo has won seven league titles and five Champions Leagues. Messi has won a club record 34 major trophies as a Barcelona player, including ten league titles, four Champions Leagues, seven Copa del Rey titles, seven Spanish Super Cups, three European Super Cups, and three FIFA Club World Cups. He has also won four national cups, two league cups, six national super cups, and four FIFA Club World Cups. In 2008, Messi won a gold medal at the Olympic Games held in China, and in 2005, he won the FIFA U-20 World Cup. Messi was the best player at the 2008 Olympic Games, and he won the FIFA U-20 World Cup. In addition, Messi was runner-up at three Copa Américas and at the 2014 World Cup. At the 2021 Copa América, Messi was named joint-best player and top scorer, and he won his first major international trophy. 

== Head-to-head ==

In past years, it had been said that the rivalry between Real Madrid and Barcelona is the best in the world. This is because Messi and Ronaldo have always played against each other in El Clásico. 
